as an elementary school teacher my mom
did everything she could to ensure I had
good reading skills there's usually
consisted of weekend reading lessons at
our kitchen table while my friends
played outside my reading ability
improved but these forced reading
lessons didn't exactly inspire a love of
reading high school changed everything
in 10th grade my regular English class
read short stories in its spelling test
out of sheer boredom I asked to be
switching to another class the next
semester I joined advanced English we
read two novels and wrote two book
reports that semester the drastic
difference in rigor between these two
English classes angered me and spur
questions like where did all these white
people come from my high school was over
70% black and Latino but this advanced
English class and white students
everywhere this personal encounter with
institutionalized racism altered my
relationship with reading forever I
learned that I couldn't depend on a
school a teacher or curriculum to teach
me what I needed to know and more out of
like rebellion than being intellectual I
decided I would no longer allow other
people to dictate when and what I read
and without realizing it I'd stumbled
upon a key to helping children read
identity instead of fixating on skills
and moving students from one reading
level to another or forcing struggling
readers to memorize lists of unfamiliar
words we should be asking ourselves this
question how can we inspire children to
identify as readers they shine a
brilliant first grade art taught in the
Bronks he helped me understand how
identity shapes learning one day during
math walk up today sign and I say they
shine you're a great mathematician he
looks at me responds I'm not a
mathematician I don't math genius okay
they shine right reading a completely
different story mister Irby I can't read
I'm never gonna learn to read he would
say I taught day shine to read but there
are countless black boys who remain
trapped in illiteracy according to the
US Department of Education more than 85%
of black male fourth graders are not
proficient in reading 85% the more
challenges to reading children face the
more culturally competent educators need
to be moonlighting as a stand-up
comedian for the past eight years I
understand the importance of cultural
competency which I define as the ability
to translate what you want someone else
to know or be able to do into
communication or experiences that they
find relevant and engaging before going
on stage I assess an audience are they
white are they Latino are they old young
professional conservative then I curate
and modify my jokes based on what I
think will generate the most laughter
while performing in a church
I could tell bar jokes but that might
not result in laughter
as a society we're creating reading
experiences for children that are the
equivalent of telling bar jokes in a
church and then we wonder why so many
children don't read educator and
philosopher Paulo Freire II believe that
teaching and learning should be two-way
students shouldn't be viewed as empty
buckets to be filled with facts but as
co-creators of knowledge cookie-cutter
curriculums and school policies that
require students to sit statue steel or
to work in complete silence these
environments often exclude the
individual learning needs the interests
and the expertise of children especially
black boys many of the children's books
promoted to black boys focus on serious
topics like slavery civil rights and
biographies less than 2% of teachers in
the United States are black males and a
majority of black boys are raised by
single mothers
there are literally young black boys who
have never seen a black man reading or
never had a black man encouraged him to
read what cultural factors what social
cues are present that would lead a young
black boy to conclude that reading is
even something he should do this is why
I created barbershop books
it's a literacy nonprofit that creates
child-friendly reading spaces in
barbershops the mission is simple to
help young black boys identify as
readers lots of black boys go to the
barbershop once or twice a month some
see their barbers more than they see
their father's barbershop books connects
reading to a male centered space and
involves black men and boys early
reading experiences this identity-based
reading program uses a curated list of
children's books recommended by black
boys these are the books that they
actually want to read scholastics
20:16 kids and family report found that
the number one thing children look for
when choosing a book is a book that will
make them laugh so if we're serious
about helping black boys and other
children to read when it's not required
we need to incorporate relevant male
reading models into early literacy and
exchange some of the children's books
that adults love so much for funny silly
or even gross books like girls great you
call them boogers
greg calls them delicious little sugars
that laugh that positive reaction or
gross reactions some of you just had
black boys deserve and desperately need
more of that dismantling the savage
inequalities that plagued american
education requires us to create reading
experiences that inspire all children to
say three words i'm a reader thank you
[Applause]